Human psychology is one of the biggest causes of climate change denial. Stress, the
feeling of a lack of control and being detached from the direct effects of a distant danger
have all been shown to encourage dismissive and conspiratorial thinking, which is one of
the key factors that makes people reluctant to accept climate change. In addition,
confirmation bias, or the tendency to trust information that confirms one’s own views, makes
challenging climate change deniers difficult. However, recent data shows that the majority of
the world’s population does believe in climate change[7]. This has been conducive to
significant improvements in climate policy. In fact, as climate change deniers have become
less influential and policy progress is being made, the top concern may be whether or not
we can slow warming fast enough.
While the share of people who don’t believe in climate change has declined, understanding
what causes these beliefs is important to addressing complex issues that may arise in the
future. One major reason for climate change denial is distrust in governments and
scientists, which can mean that conspiracy theories about climate change, which often
involve corrupt scientists and lies by those in power, become much easier for people to
accept. A literature review[1] by the American Psychological Association found “ample
evidence” (p.126) that citizens distrust risk messages from scientists or the government,
causing them to react negatively to advice or policy that they perceive to impinge on their
freedom. Moreover, a study[19] by Goertzel (1994) also found that people who distrusted
authority were more likely to believe in a number of conspiracy theories. Both of these
factors can have worrying implications for the rise of climate change denial in countries with
actually corrupt and manipulative governments, such as Russia, where only 43% of citizens
consider climate change a serious threat[20].
Another reason for denial is feeling helpless, which can often make people seek alternative
narratives to regain their sense of control. For example, one study[2] found that residents
asked to recall a situation where they didn’t have control were more likely to believe in
corrupt or untrustworthy actions by their government: one of multiple[3][4] studies linking
belief in conspiracies and feelings of helplessness. Climate change is a complex issue and
solving it is far beyond the control of any single individual, with serious and stressful
consequences. This is exactly the type of problem that is ripe for conspiracy and denial.
Climate change denial has also persisted due to confirmation bias. Deniers tend to question
or dismiss information that goes against their beliefs and accept evidence that confirms
them. One study[5] by Lijian and Yanmengqian (2021) asked participants, who had
answered whether they believed in climate change or not, to evaluate three videos
expressing different views on climate change before reporting their final attitude on the
topic. The researchers found that people would consider messages that challenged their
pre-existing beliefs as less effective and their sources as less credible. This pattern of bias
was more often present in deniers, according to the study. These results suggested that,
once exposed to misinformation, the remaining deniers in particular will be very difficult to
persuade otherwise.
Despite these factors, the vast majority (94%[7] according to the World Economic Forum)
of the world population do believe that climate change exists. A study by the UNDP[8]
found that 64% of people consider climate change an emergency. This number also
appears to be on an upwards trend; Pew research has found a general increase in
concern about climate change among citizens of ‘advanced economies’ (except japan)[9]
and Yale surveys showing an 8% increase in Americans believing in climate change,
from 64% in 2014[10] to 72% in 2020[6], with a significant portion of the rest answering
“Don’t know” (16% in 2020[6]) rather than “No”.
Furthermore, world leaders are finally showing greater resolve to take meaningful action
to stop climate change, as illustrated by the Kyoto Protocol (192 countries)[11] and Paris
Agreement (196 countries in 2015)[12], with these and subsequent national and
international climate policies nearly halving predictions for temperature rise (see
graph[13] below). Recent COP conferences
have also improved these predictions, with
the outcome of COP26 leading to a reduction
in global warming estimates from 2.7℃ to
2.4℃, according to UCL[14].
It may seem unusual to take an optimistic view
on climate change, but trends in global public
opinion and in policy seem to be positive.
While there is still important debate going on
about whether governments and companies
are moving fast enough, the influence of
climate change deniers seems to be fading.
While this sounds cautiously optimistic, the climate situation overall is still worrying. Even
current pledges and targets are unlikely to prevent a temperature rise of less than 2℃[13],
with actions needed to keep the rise below 1.5°C described as “very ambitious” by the
IPCC[17]
if not entirely “implausible”[18] by others, suggesting that the monumental efforts and
spending required to achieve “net zero by 2050[17]” might be greater than those needed to
manage the effects of a 2-2.4°C temperature rise. Taking into account the IPCC prediction
that a global temperature rise of 2°C instead of 1.5°C could result in around 420 million
more people being frequently exposed to extreme heatwaves [15] and, according to AMAP,
“the probability of an ice-free Arctic summer is 10 times greater under a 2°C global warming
scenario compared with a 1.5°C scenario[16]”; one of the countless devastating effects such
a change will likely have on ecosystems around the world.
Finding ways to minimise these impacts is urgently important, as a growing number of
people recognise. While climate change conspiracies and denial rooted in human
psychology will never completely disappear, the actual influence of this group of people is
shrinking. While progress to limit climate change is accelerating, the situation remains very
dangerous and the greatest priority should be working with politicians and businesses to
lower emissions as quickly as possible, because every 0.5°C increase can have serious
effects and our time to act is running out.